License: under CC-EW 'by' v2.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/uk/)
Author: Rufus Pollock

Hi and welcome to this, the second open knowledge forum. I'm Rufus Pollock from
the Open Knowledge Foundation and before we get into the speakers I'm just
going to say a few words. First what is /open/ knowledge?

Knowledge can be open in three distinct senses:

  1. Legal. Knowledge is legally open if you are /allowed/ to get it. So to
  take an example that came up last time but is relevant here: US Zip codes and
  UK postcodes. Zip codes are open that is anyone is allowed to have and use
  the database. UK postcodes by contrast are not -- they are covered by Crown
  Copyright and owned I believe by the Post Office.
  
  2. Social. Knowledge is socially open if you /can/ (easily) get it, for
  example by downloading from a website. To illustrate consider another example
  from the last forum: your MP's voting record. While it has always been the
  case that there was nothing illegal about providing a database of MPs voting
  records there wasn't one actually available until recently when the site
  publicwhip came along.
  
  3. Technological. Knowledge is technologically open if it is in a form that
  you can actually read/manipulate once you have it. Conversely providing a
  document in a closed format that you would need special proprietary software
  to access would be make break this.

Now we have got a clear idea of what open means in this context you might be
wondering what is the purpose of a forum on open /geodata/?

Well, to give you an idea consider the story of a friend of mine. He's a
serious environmentalist type -- volunteers for the Green Party, rides a bike
/everywhere/, thinks about the eco-consequences of every consumption decision
... you get the picture. Now because of this he decided to buy Ecover, which
I'm told is an extra special eco-friendly type of washing up powder. But guess
what, it comes in a plastic bottle -- and in small amounts which means a lot of
these plastic bottles. Serious environmental minus points, right?

But Ecover aren't dumb, they can see this is a bit of a problem so they provide
a service by which you can take your bottle along to special 'filling stations'
and top it up. Great! But /where/ is your local filling station? It's really
hard to find out. Wouldn't it be great if you could just go to some website and
type in your postcode (currently closed data) and hey presto there it is a
little map (currently closed data) with the nearest station marked on it. And
wouldn't it be even better if I don't have to wait until Ecover do this, or
some other commercial group but anyone could put up the site.

But right now what I have just described is impossible because most of the data
needed isn't open. The maps aren't open (they're Crown Copyright of the Ordance
Survey) and the postcode data isn't open (it's Crown Copyright of the Post
Office). So without even trying we've got one great example of what a bit of
coding skills and more open information could do for a whole group of people
who've probably never even thought about geodata, let alone open geodata, in
their lives.

What is this telling us? It's telling us that everyday we are affected by
whether information is open or closed. Yet there is little awareneess of these
issues, be it among policy-makers, the public or among other communities. In
several areas we have started to see awareness and activity beginning, for
example:

  * in academia over open access for scholarly publications
  * in the development community around medicines
  * in culture with creative commons

But most of these are still small and, more importantly, unconnected.
Unconnected both with each other but also with other core constituencies be it
in policy-making, among consumers, or with technologists.

Thus the purpose of these forums is to address that and, in an informal
setting, go some way to bringing these communities together and getting these
diverse constituencies talking.
